---
title: 'Cemex Hacks 2024'
date: 2024-11-15
permalink: /posts/2024/11/cmx-hacks-2024/
tags:
  - Innovation
  - Sustainability
  - Green Energy
---

Cemex Hacks is a three-day event focused on developing solutions that can change the future through digitalization, sustainable cities, or innovative resource use. My team and I proposed a concrete-based solution that transforms thermal energy into electrical energy.


Introduction
======
Monterrey has been experiencing the highest temperatures in all of Mexico, reaching 40°C (104°F). The high temperatures, the lack of trees, and the poor electrical system infrastructure contribute to a wide range of problems. The lack of trees increases the thermal sensation, which makes people turn on the Air Conditioner to relieve the warm temperatures. However, when many neighborhoods consume more energy, the system collapses, producing a power outage affecting many people. A possible solution is putting solar panels in the houses, but they're out of reach for many people because of the price. An [UNAM](http://doi.org/10.22201/cuaieed.16076079e.2021.22.4.9) study says thermal energy can be converted into electrical energy, which will be the scope of our project.

Solution
======
The Seebeck effect is the physical law that allows us to propose this solution. It is a phenomenon that generates voltage when there's a temperature difference, so if we have hot summer days producing heat, the difference in the concrete temperature will produce electrical energy. 

We propose adding certain conductors to the concrete on roofs or sidewalks to capture the thermal energy and transform it into electrical energy.

Implementation
======
Our first approach was to store the energy in batteries and then use it when necessary. 

To produce the effect, the idea was to mix dead concrete with graphite, both inexpensive and because the graphite will be optimal for enhancing the thermal energy, redirecting it to a copper plate and performing the transformation. The plate will be connected to the cables to move the energy to the batteries.


Making the solution intelligent
======
Since I'm not a civil engineer or nanotechnology engineer like my teammates, I proposed adding intelligence to the solution through sensors in batteries to monitor energy production, consumption, and storage information. I also went one step further and proposed adding machine learning to predict energy production for the following hours, and, finally, an anomaly detector would anticipate and fix the structure before it fails. Finally, I proposed monitoring proposed monitoring the CO2 saved because of the clean energy implementation.

The resulting platform can be reviewed [here](https://cmxhacksenergy.tiiny.site/).


Conclusion
======
The solution will generate a positive impact on society since it aims to be inexpensive and easy to install. It will also reduce the thermal sensation in homes by transforming that energy into electric energy.

According to our research, storing energy will increase prices dramatically so that energy storage could be postponed.

Further research is required to determine the amounts of energy generated and the necessary material to add to the concrete without affecting its properties. 
